README.md, before:

# NeuraLogix Mini Lab 🔬

> **A High-Dimensional Topology Research Sandbox**

[![License: MIT](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-MIT-yellow.svg)](https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT)
[![Tech Stack](https://img.shields.io/badge/Stack-React_|_Vite_|_Tailwind-blue)](https://reactjs.org/)
[![AI Provider](https://img.shields.io/badge/AI-Gemini_&_Ollama-purple)](https://ai.google.dev/)

NeuraLogix Mini Lab is an interactive environment for studying the topology of AI vector embeddings. It allows researchers to generate embeddings (Text or Image), apply different compression algorithms ("Cluster-based" vs. "Lattice-based"), and visualize the resulting semantic distortion.

The tool is designed to identify the **"Efficiency Frontier"**—the specific compression parameters where data size is minimized while semantic meaning remains intact.

---

## 🧪 The Science: What are we testing?

Most vector databases compress data using Scalar Quantization (reducing precision). This lab tests a different hypothesis based on **Lattice Theory**:

1.  **Semantic Efficiency:** A custom metric calculated as `Cosine Similarity / (1 + Mean Squared Error)`. It finds the "sweet spot" where the compression grid aligns perfectly with the data's natural clusters.
2.  **Lattice Stability Index (LSI):** Measures how well the relative distances between "concepts" (e.g., Cat vs. Dog) are preserved after snapping them to a rigid grid.
3.  **Vector Collisions:** When two distinct concepts map to the exact same coordinate in compressed space, a "collision" occurs. This lab visually flags these catastrophic failures.

---

## 🚀 Features

*   **Multi-Modal Analysis:** Embed **Text** (with noise injection) or **Images** (via Vision models).
*   **Dual AI Engine:**
    *   ☁️ **Google Gemini:** High-speed, high-quality embeddings via the Cloud.
    *   🏠 **Ollama (Local):** Privacy-focused, offline embeddings running on your own hardware.
*   **3D Topology Surface:** A dynamic 3D plot visualizing the trade-off between Continuity (Grid Step) and Abstraction (K-Means Clusters).
*   **Collision Detection:** Automatically detects and lists items that have lost their distinctiveness.
*   **Mobile Lab:** Fully responsive design allowing you to control the experiment from a phone while running the compute on a laptop.

---

## 🛠️ Installation & Setup

### Prerequisites
*   Node.js (v18+)
*   API Key for Google Gemini (Optional, but recommended)
*   Ollama (Optional, for local AI)

### 1. Clone and Install
```bash
git clone https://github.com/your-username/neuralogix-mini-lab.git
cd neuralogix-mini-lab
npm install

Environment Configuration
Create a .env file in the root directory:
code
Env
# Required for Google Provider
API_KEY=your_google_gemini_api_key_here
3. Run Development Server
code
Bash
npm run dev
Open http://localhost:5173 in your browser.
🏠 Using Local AI (Ollama)
You can run this lab entirely offline using Ollama.
Install Ollama from ollama.com.
Pull Models:
code
Bash
ollama pull nomic-embed-text  # For Text Embeddings
ollama pull llava             # For Vision/Image Description
Enable CORS:
By default, browser security blocks websites from talking to local servers. You must run Ollama with CORS enabled.
Mac/Linux:
code
Bash
OLLAMA_ORIGINS="*" ollama serve
Windows (PowerShell):
code
Powershell
$env:OLLAMA_ORIGINS="*"; ollama serve
Connect in App:
Open the Lab settings (Gear Icon), select Ollama, and click "Test Connection".

Connect in App:
Open the Lab settings (Gear Icon), select Ollama, and click "Test Connection".
📱 Mobile / LAN Access
To access the lab from your phone (on the same Wi-Fi):
Run with Host flag:
code
Bash
npm run dev -- --host
Check Terminal: Note the Network URL (e.g., http://192.168.1.5:5173).
Phone Setup:
Open that URL on your phone.
If using Ollama, go to Settings.
Change Base URL from localhost to your computer's IP (e.g., http://192.168.1.5:11434).

📊 Understanding the Charts
1. PCA Projection (Scatter Plot)
A 2D simplification of the 768-dimensional space.
Dots: Data points (Concepts).
Colors: In the compressed view, dots snap to a grid.
Goal: Keep the "shape" of the cluster similar between Original and Compressed.
2. Continuity-Abstraction Surface (3D Map)
This is the master control for the research.
X-Axis (Grid Step): How coarse the lattice is.
Y-Axis (K-Value): How aggressively we group concepts.
Z-Axis (Height): The LSI score.
Ridge Line: The green peaks represent the most efficient compression settings.
🤝 Contributing
This is a research project. We welcome contributions regarding:
New mathematical metrics for semantic fidelity.
Support for additional Vector Stores (Pinecone, Milvus).
Visualization improvements.

MIT License

Copyright (c) 2025 Robert Culp (CULPRITCHAOS)

Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:

The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.

Commercial use beyond prototyping or research requires explicit written permission from the author.

THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND...

Commit message:

Update README with NeuraLogix-Mini performance metrics
Added performance metrics for NeuraLogix-Mini regarding compression and stability boundaries.

README.md, after:

# NeuraLogix Mini Lab 🔬

> **A High-Dimensional Topology Research Sandbox**

[![License: MIT](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-MIT-yellow.svg)](https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT)
[![Tech Stack](https://img.shields.io/badge/Stack-React_|_Vite_|_Tailwind-blue)](https://reactjs.org/)
[![AI Provider](https://img.shields.io/badge/AI-Gemini_&_Ollama-purple)](https://ai.google.dev/)

NeuraLogix Mini Lab is an interactive environment for studying the topology of AI vector embeddings. It allows researchers to generate embeddings (Text or Image), apply different compression algorithms ("Cluster-based" vs. "Lattice-based"), and visualize the resulting semantic distortion.

The tool is designed to identify the **"Efficiency Frontier"**—the specific compression parameters where data size is minimized while semantic meaning remains intact.

---

## 🧪 The Science: What are we testing?

Most vector databases compress data using Scalar Quantization (reducing precision). This lab tests a different hypothesis based on **Lattice Theory**:

1.  **Semantic Efficiency:** A custom metric calculated as `Cosine Similarity / (1 + Mean Squared Error)`. It finds the "sweet spot" where the compression grid aligns perfectly with the data's natural clusters.
2.  **Lattice Stability Index (LSI):** Measures how well the relative distances between "concepts" (e.g., Cat vs. Dog) are preserved after snapping them to a rigid grid.
3.  **Vector Collisions:** When two distinct concepts map to the exact same coordinate in compressed space, a "collision" occurs. This lab visually flags these catastrophic failures.

---
“For an image dataset of N items, NeuraLogix-Mini achieved ~73% compression with LSI≈0.89 and cosine≈0.89 at grid=0.05, k=10; beyond grid≥0.25, LSI collapses, establishing a clear stability boundary.”

## 🚀 Features

*   **Multi-Modal Analysis:** Embed **Text** (with noise injection) or **Images** (via Vision models).
*   **Dual AI Engine:**
    *   ☁️ **Google Gemini:** High-speed, high-quality embeddings via the Cloud.
    *   🏠 **Ollama (Local):** Privacy-focused, offline embeddings running on your own hardware.
*   **3D Topology Surface:** A dynamic 3D plot visualizing the trade-off between Continuity (Grid Step) and Abstraction (K-Means Clusters).
*   **Collision Detection:** Automatically detects and lists items that have lost their distinctiveness.
*   **Mobile Lab:** Fully responsive design allowing you to control the experiment from a phone while running the compute on a laptop.

---

## 🛠️ Installation & Setup

### Prerequisites
*   Node.js (v18+)
*   API Key for Google Gemini (Optional, but recommended)
*   Ollama (Optional, for local AI)

### 1. Clone and Install
```bash
git clone https://github.com/your-username/neuralogix-mini-lab.git
cd neuralogix-mini-lab
npm install

Environment Configuration
Create a .env file in the root directory:
code
Env
# Required for Google Provider
API_KEY=your_google_gemini_api_key_here
3. Run Development Server
code
Bash
npm run dev
Open http://localhost:5173 in your browser.
🏠 Using Local AI (Ollama)
You can run this lab entirely offline using Ollama.
Install Ollama from ollama.com.
Pull Models:
code
Bash
ollama pull nomic-embed-text  # For Text Embeddings
ollama pull llava             # For Vision/Image Description
Enable CORS:
By default, browser security blocks websites from talking to local servers. You must run Ollama with CORS enabled.
Mac/Linux:
code
Bash
OLLAMA_ORIGINS="*" ollama serve
Windows (PowerShell):
code
Powershell
$env:OLLAMA_ORIGINS="*"; ollama serve
Connect in App:
Open the Lab settings (Gear Icon), select Ollama, and click "Test Connection".

Connect in App:
Open the Lab settings (Gear Icon), select Ollama, and click "Test Connection".
📱 Mobile / LAN Access
To access the lab from your phone (on the same Wi-Fi):
Run with Host flag:
code
Bash
npm run dev -- --host
Check Terminal: Note the Network URL (e.g., http://192.168.1.5:5173).
Phone Setup:
Open that URL on your phone.
If using Ollama, go to Settings.
Change Base URL from localhost to your computer's IP (e.g., http://192.168.1.5:11434).

📊 Understanding the Charts
1. PCA Projection (Scatter Plot)
A 2D simplification of the 768-dimensional space.
Dots: Data points (Concepts).
Colors: In the compressed view, dots snap to a grid.
Goal: Keep the "shape" of the cluster similar between Original and Compressed.
2. Continuity-Abstraction Surface (3D Map)
This is the master control for the research.
X-Axis (Grid Step): How coarse the lattice is.
Y-Axis (K-Value): How aggressively we group concepts.
Z-Axis (Height): The LSI score.
Ridge Line: The green peaks represent the most efficient compression settings.
🤝 Contributing
This is a research project. We welcome contributions regarding:
New mathematical metrics for semantic fidelity.
Support for additional Vector Stores (Pinecone, Milvus).
Visualization improvements.

MIT License

Copyright (c) 2025 Robert Culp (CULPRITCHAOS)

Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:

The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.

Commercial use beyond prototyping or research requires explicit written permission from the author.

THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND...
